Hi and welcome to this video on decimals now we'll be looking at floats so far which was one way of
representing real numbers decimals is another way another mechanism that we have in Python to represent
floating point numbers to represent real numbers.
So this will use the decimal mondial.
And if you want detailed information about the implementation and the standards that we use to implement
decimals as an alternative to floats then you can look at the pepped 3:27 documentation online but I'll
cover the important stuff here.
So let's just recall what happens.
Right what our issues are.
If we take a look at 0.1 expressed as a float in Python which Remember we really call a binary float.
It uses binary numbers to store those numbers.
Then we end up with an infinite binary expansion and we've seen that before.
That's how infinite binary expansion infinite series essentially.
So we don't have an exact representation of the number in memory but it does have a finite decimal expression.
Right.
Expansion at zero point 1 which is one tenth it's finite.
So we're dealing with the fact that we're used to working with decimal numbers like you know 0.1 or
zero point to five things like that which are finite right they're exact.
And yet when we try and put them in a computer they become inexact because we have to basically stop
the expansion at some point.
We don't have an infinite amount of memory to work with.
So we need an alternative to using the binary float type.
You know how we can represent one tenth exactly in the computer right.
And we want to do that because we want to avoid the approximation issues.
And I just want to bring back and talk back about that discussion on our rational numbers now with rational
numbers so that if you have any real number that has a finite number of digits in it then it is always
a rational number.
So it doesn't matter how many digits you have before and after the decimal point as long as it's finite
it will always be a rational number it can always be expressed as a fraction.
If you don't remember that you can go back and check the videos on the rationals.
So the question might be why don't we just use the fraction class.
I mean it's there it already exists.
We know that 0.1 is 110 for example.
That is a rational number.
Zero Point 2 5 is 25 over 100.
That's a rational number.
And so on.
So why not use the fraction class.
Well let's take a look let's say if we say one tenth plus one fifth What do we need to do.
Well the first thing we need to do is we need to come up with a common denominator one tenth plus two
fifths is 110 plus two Firth's would be for 10 so we're looking at five tenths right.
That's our result five tenths.
But wait a minute.
Now we have to simplify five tenses one over to sort of one half.
So you can see the amount of computations you have to do to add let's say.
And just to add two fractions together.
So it takes up you know a lot more computational effort and also requires more memory because you need
to store these things as you're doing the computation right you need memory to store the common denominator
you need you know some operations to go ahead and calculate the common denominator.
Then you need to do the simplification after that.
So it's more complex it requires extra memory you know compared to a float.
It is much slower.
So it's not ideal.
Is there a better approach to that potentially.
So the next question you may ask before we get on to is there a better approach is why do we even care
about this.
Why don't we just use binary floats.
I mean.
Yeah.
You know it's not exact but you know 0.1 might be 0.1 0 0 0 a bunch of zeros and a few digits after
that.
That's close enough.
Right.
You know I mean we're maybe we're off at the 17th or 18th digit after the decimal point.
Big deal.
Well in some cases actually it is a big deal.
Right.
Whether a number is small or big.
Kind of depends on the context.
You know it kind of depends and in the end in our industries like finance or banking you know having
exact finite representations you know is highly desirable.
You want bank accounts you know balances to be exact.
You don't want them to be approximate it's better if they can be exact.
Why.
Well let's take a look at an example right because you may think again that a you know if my or my bank
account is 100 point 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 and no big deal but let's say that we're adding up financial
transactions that took place over a certain time period.
Let's say that the financial transaction is one hundred point zero or one for simplicity and keeping
them equal.
Right they're all going to be the same value.
But let's say we have these transactions and we want to add them up and let's say that we have a billion
transactions.
I know what you're thinking.
Wait a minute.
A billion transactions I'm exaggerating right.
Which bank does a billion transactions over a certain time period.
Maybe over you know 5 10 year period.
Well no that's not true.
That happens quite often.
In fact the New York stock exchange trades about two to six billion shares daily every day.
So you know adding up a billion of those numbers is you know is actually peanuts right compared to what
you might actually be really doing in reality.
And some of those places so let's take a look at the problem that this causes.
So let's say 100.0 one.
And so this is the float the binary float representation as you can see were off by tiny about amounts
like right over here.
Right.
So the problem though is when we add up these things and the problem is that this inexactitude that
we have compounds as we do more and more operations and it's compounding that causes the problem.
Yeah if it was just the single time 100.0 one to say hey your balance is one hundred point zero or 1
000.
Yeah.
That doesn't matter.
But as we add things together it does as we compound the errors it does.
So the real sum right which would be the exact decimal sum is this value here.
And if we do that using a float and all I did was just write a small python program that basically adds
that number one hundred point zero or one billion times.
This is the result that I got.
And as you can see now that is far off right.
It is a thousand two hundred thirty eight dollars which is a big deal.
Yes relatively speaking it's a small difference.
Right.
But if you look at it in real terms in absolute terms you know it's if you're producing a report or
you're producing you know a result for somebody and you tell them hey you know this is how much money
we're transacted today by the way it's probably off you know thousand to a couple thousand dollars but
no big deal no big deal.
Right.
So anyways that's why we're interested in having exact representations for our you know base 10 numbers
for all Zero Point 1 0 0 1 2 5 0 0 point 0.3 4 which are things that we use daily in financial sectors.
OK.
So how are we going to work with decimals.
Well there's a couple of things we need to look at the decimal module has the decimal class which is
what we'll use to actually create decimal numbers.
But when you work with decimal numbers you want to also be able to specify the precision that you're
interested in because you don't yes you can say my Precision is you know 28 but that's maybe not what
you needed maybe too much for what you need.
You know in your particular application maybe in your particular application having you know five digits
is good enough.
Right.
So it kind of depends.
So you have a context and this context is basically nothing more than a way to specify certain characteristics
of your decimal numbers.
And there are quite a few but the two main ones that we're going to look at are the precision and the
rounding.
So you can set your precision Now this precision only actually applies to the arithmetic operations.
Right.
So basically it's how far does it keep the precision as it's doing addition multiplication and other
mathematical functions that you may apply to decimal numbers.
And then the other one is the rounding algorithm.
Now if you remember our discussion in the floats videos we talked about the rounding algorithm that
float implements which is not the algorithm that will necessarily use to write our algorithm.
We tie to the closest value but we then have a tiebreaker rule right.
And the tiebreaker rule used for floats is a little different than what we normally use you know commonly
which is you know moving away from 0.
So in the decimals you can actually specify the rounding algorithm.
You can't do that for floats.
You're stuck with that one if you want to do your own rounding algorithm.
You had to basically prove provide your own round function but not so with decimals.
Now this context comes in kind of two flavors.
You can have a global context which is basically the default context.
Right.
That context basically allows you to set your precision and your rounding.
But you can also have a local context which is temporary where you can set.
You can change those settings without affecting the global context so it's just a convenience thing.
Right.
Because let's say that you're working in you know in a global context that uses 10 for the precision.
But now you're doing some kind of calculation then you say well wait a minute I need to extend the precision
a little bit because that's that's not enough what I need to do right now in this particular case.
So then you change your global context precision to maybe 20.
And then when you're done you need to remember to set your global context precision back to 10.
So that can you know if you forget to do that.
It might cause problems.
So instead what you can do is create a local temporary context change a precision to 20 do whatever
you need to do.
And then the local context goes away and you're back to your global context that you'll never change.
So it's still set up the way it was before.
So that's really all the differences between global and local contexts.
So the way you work with those as well.
First of all you're going to import the decimal module and you get the default context.
You just say decimal does get context that's it that returns the global context and you can view the
settings and then you can change the settings in there for the local context.
It's very similar.
You do decimal that local context.
Now it does take a single optional parameter and that parameter just defines the context that you want
to huse.
So it's like what's going on.
Well if you want to create a local context you may want to create it with some initial values and the
way that it generally does it if you don't pass anything it will actually default to the global context
so it will take a copy of the global context and give it back to you as a local context.
Or you can specify your own from scratch.
You can do that as well.
The only difference between local context and get context is that it returns a context manager which
is means that something you use will be with statement and we'll take a look at that.
In a few seconds.
If you haven't used context managers before don't worry too much we will cover context managers later
on in the scores.
In fact we'll be looking at how to create our own contact's manages contracts managers are nice because
they allow you to basically manage certain things automatically.
So for example like if you use files right you can use a context manager with files when you open your
file and then you can work with the file and then when you're done you don't have to explicitly close
the file which you need to do.
The context manager will then basically exit and say oh OK I need to clean up.
I need to go cause the file and in our case we'll look maybe at how to create a context manager to close
off a database connections very useful for that.
So use a context manager.
You open up your database connection you do your queries and then when you're done the context manager
automatically goes off and maybe closes the connection or releases the connection back into a pool whatever
it is that you're trying to do.
So that's the difference.
Local contacts will return a context manager get contacts will return the default global context so
the precision and rounding.
Well it's very simple.
And we'll take a look at an example where we use the global context but it works the same with the local
context as well.
So let's say we have decimal that get context that returns the global context.
And now we can just say context that are easy for precision or we can say context CTX dot rounding which
will return the rounding mechanism or set the rounding mechanism depending on what we want to do.
And that's defined using a string.
There are constants defined in the decimal module that will define those strings for us so we you know
we don't have to worry about making a mistake in the string itself.
And here are the various constants that are available in the decimal module for the rounding algorithm.
Now if you remember this round half even which rounds to nearest with ties to even is what the float
rounding algorithm is.
And if you remember we couldn't change it.
That's what it was when we called the round method.
That's what it was.
And if we want to you use round half up which routes to nearest ties away from 0 which is the rounding
that we may be more used to we have to write our own algorithm.
Well that's not the case with the decimal module decimal module provides us these two rounding algorithms
and a bunch of others as well.
So depending on your use case you can pick what you want but it defaults to around half even just like
with the floats.
But if you want to change it to something else you can and you don't have to write your own implementation
at.
As long as it's within this set of rounding algorithms so working with global and local contexts.
Let's take a look.
Very quickly how we work with both so let's say we're now Maggio or in our function and we want to do
some stuff we want to change let's say the rounding which I know defaults to around half of let's say
was changed before and we want to change it now.
So it's a decimal to get context.
Now remember this is the Maggio get context as a method in that module.
So we don't have an instance of a class at this point that rounding equals decimal up around half way
up.
Right so this get contacts whittles the global context we'll look at the global context rounding attributes
and then we set it equal to some value.
And then every thing we do from this point forward we'll use the current default contacts which we use
round half up right.
Everything we do from this point forward until we change the global context again.
Unless we use a local context for a local context the way it works is that we call decimal that local
context which will create a copy of the current default context and return it as a context manager.
So we say with decimal that local context as CTX and now ctx is the context and we can set different
things so now we could change the precision and say well that's equal to 2 or the rounding.
And we can change the rounding and then every operation we perform here within the with block will be
within that local context.
Right.
So the global context may have a precision of 28 for this global local context may have a precision
to only once you're finished once you exit the local context any operations you perform afterwards will
be again based on the global context which hasn't changed.
So it's a little more convenient than changing the global context.
Doing your computations and then changing the global context back to what it should be.
So let's take a look at some code which will do in the next video.
So you know it.